---
title:57 examples of partnered parent privilege
image: https://live.staticflickr.com/169/470962507_e0f6c4b831_c_d.jpg
tags: parenting
---

Recently Kristen Tea, a writer and mom I greatly admire, wrote an article for Mother Wise called You’re Not A Single Mom Unless You’re a Single Mom, and I really agreed with and loved it. I have been highly offended many times in the past to hear happily married women in dual income households or households where one parent is able to stay home refer to themselves as single moms.
They did this even in front of me, who actually was a single mom for many years, maybe even when I still was a single mom. I was always quick to correct them, no, you are nothing like a single parent, and if you are, you need to divorce, because it’s better to be alone than to be with someone who treats you that poorly. Even in that case, though, there’s a certain level of privilege that partnered parents have access to that single parents (especially single mothers) do not. Single parents (especially single mothers, and especially single mothers who were not at one point married to their children’s biologic father) are often vilified and discriminated against by society, and that’s something Kristin doesn’t address in her awesome article, so I thought I’d write this up as an add on to what she said.
Now, I think the differences between partnered parents and single parents should be pretty obvious. For one, partnered parents tend to live in one of two situations, one in which they are either getting two incomes, or just one income, but they don’t have to pay for childcare. Single parents, on the other hand, not only live on one income, but also have to pay for childcare, which can cost up to half of their one income. (Here in Denver a person has to make $20 an hour to make twice what childcare costs for just one child). On top of all of that, single parents make less than partnered parents in the exact same job, they miss more work to stay home with sick kids (of course, there’s only one parent to do it) and are more likely to send sick children to school or go to work sick themselves out of financial need. Even single parents who have good coparenting relationships and are able to combine resources equally to raise their kids face additional financial burdens that partnered parents do not, such as needing to use their combined income to pay for two homes instead of just one, and being restricted in where they can move and what jobs they can take due to legally binding custody agreements. But I guess putting all of these things together isn’t as obvious for some as it is for others (I was, after all, raised by a single mom and was a single mom, and now I work as a single mom advocate in my free time, so I have a unique perspective), so I have gone ahead and put together a list. I could call this examples of partnered parent privilege. Now it’s true that not all single parents experience all of this, and some partnered parents might have experienced some of these things, but by and large, partnered parents won’t experience these things as long as they remain partnered, and single parents will experience most, if not all, of these.

## If you are a partnered parent, even one who’s partner is often traveling or otherwise away:

1. You have a second income (and you have more access to it than child support provides), or you have one income but do not have to pay for childcare because one parent can stay home with the kids
2. You have a romantic partner
3. You have someone to have sex with, even if it’s not as often as you would like
4. You have someone else to buy you birthday, Christmas, anniversary gifts, etc.
5. You can run errands without your child once in a while, or have someone else run for you
6. If you work outside the home, you are paid more than a single parent.
7. You likely can afford to take unpaid maternity leave when you birth your child, because you still have a whole other income coming in.
8. You have an additional person to take off work to be with a sick child, so it’s not always your paycheck that suffers
9. You have never spent a single day in custody court.
10. You have never had to garnish your partners paycheck.
11. You never have to share or miss holidays or birthdays with your kids.
12. Presidential candidates don’t blame you for gun violence.
13. There is no religious or conservative campaign against you.
14. No one has written a book blaming you for violent crime.
15. Your family is not stigmatized and oppressed by society.
16. You are not slut shamed for your children’s existence.
17. There is not a population of predatory men out there looking to take advantage of you because they perceive you to be dumb and desperate.
18. You are far less likely to live in poverty (thanks higher pay and dual incomes)
19. You’ve never had to do legal battle to get your child’s other parent to pay their fair share or use their visitation
20. Your children have never had to testify in front of a judge saying which parent they would rather live with.
21. You don’t have to deal with your children’s other parent’s new partner, who may parent drastically different than you, not respect you or your children, or straight up hate you, behaving vindictively and spitefully to you or your children.
22. You don’t have to brave the dating world if you are interested in having a romantic relationship (and lest you forget what that is like, spend a few minute perusing Bye Felipe).
23. You can feel confident that your child’s other parent is not using your kids as pawns in some sick game to cause you pain.
24. You never have to send your children to spend hours, days, and even weeks in an environment you can’t control where they may not be happy or well cared for.
25. If you suspect your child is being abused in a place they are going regularly, you have the freedom to simply stop sending them there, rather than having to spend months to years meticulously gathering evidence and then going through a traumatic and expensive court battle, which might still result in your having to continue to send your kids into the abusive environment.
26. Your children will never be viewed as “baggage” by potential romantic partners.
27. Your romantic partner never has to put up with your vindictive, hateful, manipulative, or otherwise difficult ex.
28. You can probably take off work to go to special events at your child’s school.
29. You may have in laws who can provide help and support to your kids, as opposed to just your own family.
30. When you want or need to move to take a new job or something like that, you seek permission and agreement from a partner who loves you and wants to work as a team with you, and you come to a mutual decision. Rather than having to ask the permission of an ex who might be pissed at you for the breakup, or simply doesn’t want to be further from their kids or make visitation any more difficult.
31. It’s unlikely that your child’s other parent will move away without talking to you about it first (let alone not taking you with).
32. It’s unlikely that your child’s other parent will ever kidnap your children.
33. It’s unlikely that your child’s other parent is saying horrible things about you (true or otherwise) when you aren’t around.
34. You probably don’t have to worry about your child’s other parent doing horrible things to get even with you, such as putting photos of you on revenge porn sites.
35. The combined incomes of you and your child’s other parent only has to pay for one home.
36. You don’t have to deal with awkwardness or competition at your child’s special events such as graduations, award ceremonies, weddings, etc.
37. Your child’s other parent probably isn’t spoiling or attempting to buy your child’s affection.
38. You will never know the pain of finding out your child doesn’t consider your home to be their home.
39. If you are pregnant, there is not an army of predatory adoption brokers trying to guilt you into giving up your baby by telling you lies like “you can’t do this on your own” and “God will only forgive you for your sins if you give away your baby”.
40. If you are pregnant, there is not a group of judge mental, self righteous, classist morons trying to bully you into terminating your pregnancy because of lies like “You can’t do this on your own” and “You and this baby will just be a burden to the rest of us if you have it.”
41. You can take off work when you are sick, and don’t have to send your sick child to school.
42. You don’t have to defend yourself against allegations that you are an unfit parent made by your child’s other parent in court.
43. You probably have never dealt with harassment, stalking, slander, or threats from your child’s other parent.
44. You probably do not feel the need to document every interaction with your child’s other parent.
45. You’ve never had to get a restraining order against your child’s other parent.
46. You’ve never been expected to still figure out a way to arrange for your child to visit someone you have a restraining order against.
47. You’ve never had to schedule two of events such as parent teacher conferences because your child’s other parent can’t be in the same room with you.
48. You’ve never had to miss your children’s events such as sports games or recitals because your child’s other parent can’t be in the same room as you.
49. You’ve never had to prove your child’s paternity in order for your child’s other parent to take responsibility.
50. You’ve probably never been snubbed or abandoned by friends because you don’t have time for play dates or they seem to be afraid your relationship status is contagious.
51. When you are sick, there is someone else there to feed, pick up after, kiss booboos on, discipline, and ensure the safety of your children while you rest (that is, if you can afford to take a sick day, which we’ve already established you are more likely to be able to do).
52. You do not have to answer questions about your relationship status or your children’s relationship with their other parent to schools, doctors, law enforcement, etc.
53. You can obtain a passport for your children without questions or suspicion.
54. Your child is never shamed at school because of their relationship with their other parent.
55. You get to see your children more than once a year for a few weeks.
56. Never being able to take a vacation because you use literally all your vacation days to care for sick children (if you are lucky enough to have vacation days at your job).
57. You’ll never have to explain to your child why their other parent isn’t there, knowing the true answer is that they just don’t want to be.

Do you still think you’re a single parent because your partner is on a business trip, deployed, works long hours, is temporarily living in a different city because of work, or otherwise isn’t as available as you would like? Obviously those situations are difficult for their own reasons, and involve their own struggles, but you aren’t a single parent if you are in those situations. I’m not even saying that you have it easier than single parents, I don’t know that. There are lots of different kinds of single parents, and situations change. It may be much more difficult for a parent who’s partner is constantly traveling for work than it is for single parents who have really great coparenting situations. It’s probably easier for very rich single parents (like Bristol Palin) than for very poor partnered parents. When I was a single mom, I’m fairly certain I had it easier than many spouses of my deployed coworkers did, because I had a very supportive mother I lived with, who provided much of the same parenting and financial help that a romantic partner would have. But that still didn’t make the spouses of deployed service members single parents. They were not single, I was. Their situation was temporary, mine was not. And most of the people I heard the “I’m a single mom because my husband isn’t here this exact minute” line from were people who did, in fact, have it easier than most single parents. (Hell, I even heard it once from a woman who was legit independently wealthy, she had it better than most partnered parents I know!) The fact is that living the life of a single parent is not something you can possibly understand unless you’ve actually been a single parent, or maybe if you were raised by them. Stop trying to pretend you live the same life. You don’t.
